[DOCS] Add intro to traces (#1859)
grafana/tempo: docs/tempo/website/getting-started/traces.md

---
aliases:
- /docs/tempo/getting-started/traces
description: "What are traces?"
keywords:
- Grafana
- traces
- tracing
title: What are traces?
weight: 120
---

# What are traces?

> A traces represents the whole journey of a request or an action as it moves through all the nodes of a distributed system, especially containerized applications or microservices architectures. Traces let you profile and observe systems, making it easy to discover bottlenecks and interconnection issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A trace represents the whole journey of a request or an action as it moves through all the nodes of a distributed system, especially containerized applications or microservices architectures. Traces let you profile and observe systems, making it easy to discover bottlenecks and interconnection issues.
```

## Example of traces

> A user on your website enters their email address into a form to sign up for your mailing list. They click **Enter**. This initial transaction has a trace ID which is subsequently associated with every interaction in the chain of processes within a system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A user on your website enters their email address into a form to sign up for your mailing list. They click **Enter**. This initial transaction has a trace ID that is subsequently associated with every interaction in the chain of processes within a system.
```

> A user on your website enters their email address into a form to sign up for your mailing list. They click **Enter**. This initial transaction has a trace ID which is subsequently associated with every interaction in the chain of processes within a system.

Reviewer: I think it's important we explain the concept of `context propagation` as the base of tracing in distributed systems. Maybe here or in the terminology section.

The user's email address is data that flows through your system. In a cloud computing world, it is possible that clicking that one button causes data to touch multiple nodes across your cluster of microservices.

The email address may be sent to a verification algorithm sitting in a microservice that exists solely for that purpose. If it passes the check, the information is stored in a database.

Along the way, an anonymization node strips personally identifying data from the address and sends metadata collected to a marketing qualifying algorithm to determine whether the request was sent from a targeted part of the internet.

Services respond and data flows back from each, sometimes triggering new events across the system. Along the way, logs are written in various nodes with a time stamp showing when the info passed through.

> 

Reviewer 2: Should this be in  numbered list? Something about four consecutive two-sentence paragraphs feels a little off.

Author: I don't think so because it's not a step by step procedure. But I can update the changes a dsee what comes out.

Reviewer 3: I added some "story" words to keep the flow smooth.

Author: Thank you, Ursula.

Finally, the request and response activity ends and a record of that request is sent to Grafana or Grafana Cloud.

## Traces and labels

> Setting up tracing adds a label to all of these events. The label is generated when the request is initiated and that same label is applied to every single event as the request and response generate activity across the system.

Reviewer: It's not very clear to me what label means here. Is it label as in trace attributes?

Author: After reading this, I think label = trace ID?

Reviewer 4: As discussed we can rip out labels and replace with trace IDs and the proposed change to this section. :)

> That label enables one to trace, or follow a request as it flows from node to node, service to microservice to lambda function to wherever it goes in your chaotic, cloud computing system and back again. This is recorded and displayed as spans. Each span is the amount of time between a request and response from a specific service in the request's journey through your system.

Reviewer 2: Should we italicize the first instances of trace and span here to indicate their special meaning?

Reviewer 2: > Each span is the amount of time between a request and response from a specific service in the request's journey through your system.

This definition conflicts with the one in the terminology list. 

> Represents a specific service or node of the full trace (payment service, inventory, etc.)

In a conversation with some k6 developers, they suggested that a span was a node. And Span could have smaller spans. And that the whole tree made up a trace.

This is the definition I see on most observability tools on Google, (e.g. splunk), but I've also seen "a unit of work" (openTelemetry) and "the amount of time in a context" (tracing.rs).

I think this is terminology that should be nailed down with some developers. In effect it's not that different--either a span is a node, and the trace measures the time between spans; or a span is the time between nodes, and a trace measures the node journey and time of all spans.

But, being totally clear about these terms could help readers.

Author: Thank you for the clear and concise write-up of the definitions you've seen. 

I'll ask the Tempo team what definition they would consider to be the best definition for span and for trace.

Author: so far, the favorite definition is derived from the OTEL one: A span represents a unit of work done within a trace. 

@hedss has also written a longer definition that we could use in the text: 

> Traces are composed of one or more spans. A span is a unit of work within a trace that has a start time relative to the beginning of the trace, a duration, and an operation name for the unit of work. It usually has a reference to a parent span (unless it is the first span in a trace). It may optionally include key/value attributes that are relevant to the span itself, for example the HTTP method being used by the span, as well as other metadata such as sub-span events or links to other spans.

Here's an example showing two pages in Grafana Cloud. The first, on the left (1), shows a query using the **Explore** feature. In the query results you can see a **traceID** field that was added to an application. That field contains a **Tempo** label. The second page, on the right (2), uses the same Explore feature to perform a Tempo search using that **traceID** label. It then shows a set of spans as horizontal bars, each bar denoting a different part of the system.

<p align="center"><img src="../assets/trace-explore-spans.png" alt="Trace example"></p>

The label is applied to activities recorded as metrics and as logs. 

## What are traces used for? 

> A trace can be visualized to give a graphic representation of how long it takes for each step in the data flow pathway to complete, where new requests are initiated and end, and how your system responds. You can see bottlenecks, often in places you never would have anticipated or found without this ability to trace the request flow.

Author: ```suggestion
Traces can help you find bottlenecks. A trace can be visualized to give a graphic representation of how long it takes for each step in the data flow pathway to complete. It can show where new requests are initiated and end, and how your system responds. This data helps you locate problem areas, often in places you never would have anticipated or found without this ability to trace the request flow.
```

> A trace can be visualized to give a graphic representation of how long it takes for each step in the data flow pathway to complete, where new requests are initiated and end, and how your system responds. You can see bottlenecks, often in places you never would have anticipated or found without this ability to trace the request flow.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps start with the sentence "Traces can help you find bottlenecks", then describe the implementation specific? I think "find bottlenecks" is the key information in "what for?".

Reviewer 2: And perhaps the visualization sentence could be broken into a list? At 37 words, it exceeds the sentence limit recommendations in the writer's toolkit. [^1]

[^1]: 
https://grafana.com/docs/writers-toolkit/style-guide/style-conventions/#write-simple-words-sentences-and-paragraphs

Author: Thank you. I've reworked that paragraph based upon your suggestions.

Metrics, logs, and traces form the three pillars of observability. Metrics provide the health data about the state of a system. Logs provide an audit trail of activity that create an informational context. Traces tell you what happens at each step or action in a data pathway. 

## Terminology

Data source

> : A basic storage for data such as a database, a flat file, or even live references/measurements from a device. dA file, database, or service that provides data. For example, traces data is imported into Grafana by configuring and enabling a Tempo data source.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
: A basic storage for data such as a database, a flat file, or even live references or measurements from a device. dA file, database, or service that provides data. For example, traces data is imported into Grafana by configuring and enabling a Tempo data source.
```

Exemplar
: Any data that serves as a detailed example of one of the observations aggregated into a metric. An exemplar contains the observed value together with an optional timestamp and arbitrary labels, which are typically used to reference a trace.

Log

> : Audit trail of activity used to diagnose problems. Logs can an informational context, such as detailed records of all events during user interactions, for example, when events happen, who used the system, status messages, etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
: Audit trail of activity used to diagnose problems. Logs can provide informational context, such as detailed records of all events during user interactions, for example, when events happen, who used the system, status messages, etc.
```

---
aliases:
- /docs/tempo/getting-started/traces
description: "What are traces?"
keywords:
- Grafana
- traces
- tracing
title: What are traces?
weight: 120
---

# What are traces?

A trace represents the whole journey of a request or an action as it moves through all the nodes of a distributed system, especially containerized applications or microservices architectures. Traces let you profile and observe systems, making it easy to discover bottlenecks and interconnection issues.

Traces are composed of one or more spans. A span is a unit of work within a trace that has a start time relative to the beginning of the trace, a duration and an operation name for the unit of work. It usually has a reference to a parent span (unless it is the first span in a trace). It may optionally include key/value attributes that are relevant to the span itself, for example the HTTP method being used by the span, as well as other metadata such as sub-span events or links to other spans.

## Example of traces

> A user on your website enters their email address into a form to sign up for your mailing list. They click **Enter**. This initial transaction has a trace ID that is subsequently associated with every interaction in the chain of processes within a system.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Firstly, a user on your website enters their email address into a form to sign up for your mailing list. They click **Enter**. This initial transaction has a trace ID that is subsequently associated with every interaction in the chain of processes within a system.
```

> The user's email address is data that flows through your system. In a cloud computing world, it is possible that clicking that one button causes data to touch multiple nodes across your cluster of microservices.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Next, the user's email address is data that flows through your system. In a cloud computing world, it is possible that clicking that one button causes data to touch multiple nodes across your cluster of microservices.
```

> The email address may be sent to a verification algorithm sitting in a microservice that exists solely for that purpose. If it passes the check, the information is stored in a database.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The email address might be sent to a verification algorithm sitting in a microservice that exists solely for that purpose. If it passes the check, the information is stored in a database.
```

Along the way, an anonymization node strips personally identifying data from the address and sends metadata collected to a marketing qualifying algorithm to determine whether the request was sent from a targeted part of the internet.

> Services respond and data flows back from each, sometimes triggering new events across the system. Along the way, logs are written in various nodes with a time stamp showing when the info passed through.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Services respond and data flows back from each, which sometimes triggers new events across the system. Along the way, logs are written in various nodes with a time stamp that shows when the information passed through.
```

Metrics, logs, and traces form the three pillars of observability. Metrics provide the health data about the state of a system. Logs provide an audit trail of activity that create an informational context. Traces tell you what happens at each step or action in a data pathway. 

## Terminology

Data source
: A basic storage for data such as a database, a flat file, or even live references or measurements from a device. dA file, database, or service that provides data. For example, traces data is imported into Grafana by configuring and enabling a Tempo data source.

Exemplar
: Any data that serves as a detailed example of one of the observations aggregated into a metric. An exemplar contains the observed value together with an optional timestamp and arbitrary labels, which are typically used to reference a trace.

Log

> : Audit trail of activity used to diagnose problems. Logs can provide informational context, such as detailed records of all events during user interactions, for example, when events happen, who used the system, status messages, etc.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
: Chronological events, usually text-based, allowing for the diagnosis of problems. Logs can provide informational context, such as detailed records of all events during user interactions, for example, when events happen, who used the system, status messages, etc.
```

Metric

> : A number, helping operators understand the state of a system, for example, number of active users, error count, average response time, etc. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
: A number that helps an operator understand the state of a system, such as the number of active users, error count, average response time, and more.
```

Span

> : Represents a unit of work done within a trace.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
: Represents a unit of work done within a trace.
```
Why "Represents" and not simply  "A unit of work done within a trace."

Author: Updated.

> : Represents a unit of work done within a trace.

Author: ```suggestion
: A unit of work done within a trace.
```
